+++
title = "STATS 184: Societal Impacts of Data"
author = ["Mark S. Handcock"]
date = 2022-01-03
tags = ["courses"]
draft = false
weight = 10
+++

This course considers the impacts that data collected today have upon individuals and society. Rapid increase in scale and types of data
collected has impacted commerce and society in new ways. Consideration of economic, social and ethical, legal and political impacts of data,
especially that collected on human behavior. Topics include privacy and data protection, intellectual property and confidentiality, sample
selection and algorithms, equality and anti-discrimination. 

The Bruin Learn course page is [here](https://bruinlearn.ucla.edu/courses/79280/).

<!-- A detailed description of the class is available [here](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1Sn3TagfjAdrQ6x9jcEmwD91GZEZN7T81/view?usp=sharing/). -->

### Motivation and Synopsis

During the twentieth century, the development of statistical computing played a crucial facilitating role for the growth of the statistics
discipline and the adoption of statistical methods. In the twenty-first century digital age, the amounts of data available for statistical
analysis has grown tremendously, yielding new opportunities , as well as new challenges.

This course considers the impacts that the data collected today have upon individuals and society. The rapid increase in the scale and types of
data collected has impacted commerce and society in new ways. In this course we consider the economic, social and ethical, legal and political
impacts of data, especially that collected on human behavior. Particular topics will be privacy and data protection, intellectual property and
confidentiality, sample selection and algorithms, equality and anti-discrimination.

This course is intended to provide students sociological, psychological and economic lenses to explore how our increasingly digital lifestyle
changes institutions and social relations. These lenses are then used to guide data scientists in their work.

The course has various parts:
-   We'll consider what data is and the growth of Big Data.
-   We will consider the role data play in the broader information context and how that context influences the data we collect and the related statistical issues.
-   We will consider statistical techniques to improve privacy and data protection, confidentiality, sample selection and algorithms, equality and anti-discrimination.   

### Syllabus of the Course

<table style="border-collapse: collapse; width: 63.9406%;" border="1">
    <tbody>
        <tr>
            <td style="width: 12.3397%;"><strong>Lecture</strong></td>
            <td style="width: 87.5549%;"><strong>&nbsp;Topics</strong></td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td style="width: 12.3397%;">1</td>
            <td style="width: 87.5549%;">Introduction: <span>What, really, is Data?</span></td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td style="width: 12.3397%;">2</td>
            <td style="width: 87.5549%;"><span>Contextualizing Data</span></td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td style="width: 12.3397%;">3</td>
            <td style="width: 87.5549%;"><span>Small Data and Big Data</span></td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td style="width: 12.3397%;">4</td>
            <td style="width: 87.5549%;">Datafication and its Implications</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td style="width: 12.3397%;">5</td>
            <td style="width: 87.5549%;">Statistical methods to preserve privacy</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td style="width: 12.3397%;">6</td>
            <td style="width: 87.5549%;">Sample selection and algorithms</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td style="width: 12.3397%;">7</td>
            <td style="width: 87.5549%;">
                <p>Equality and anti-discrimination</p>
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td style="width: 12.3397%;">8</td>
            <td style="width: 87.5549%;">Intellectual and Personal Property</td>
        </tr>
            <td style="width: 12.3397%;">9</td>
            <td style="width: 87.5549%;">Additional topics</td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table>
