+++
title = "STATS 202C: Monte Carlo Methods for Optimization"
author = ["Mark S. Handcock"]
date = 2021-01-03
tags = ["courses"]
draft = false
+++

This course is a survey of Monte Carlo methods and numerical integration. Importance and rejection sampling. Sequential importance sampling.
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling techniques, with emphasis on Gibbs samplers and Metropolis/Hastings. Simulated annealing. Exact
sampling with coupling from past. Permutation testing and bootstrap confidence intervals.

<!--- (The Bruin Learn course page is [here](https://bruinlearn.ucla.edu/courses/79284/). -->

A detailed description of the class is available [here](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1w0yeax2DYoKjAbyN3p6OFSds69K8NRcn/view?usp=sharing).

### Motivation and Synopsis

During the twentieth century, the development of statistical computing played a crucial facilitating role for the growth of the statistics
discipline and the adoption of statistical methods within the scientiﬁc community and beyond. In the twenty-ﬁrst century digital age, the
amounts of data available for statistical analysis has grown tremendously, yielding new opportunities for statistical computing, as well as new
challenges. Statistical computing constitutes an important part of a statistics education, and is highly valuable for statisticians in both
academia and industry.

This graduate level course introduces Monte Carlo methods for simulation, optimization, estimation, learning and complex landscape
visualization, including: Importance sampling; Sequential importance sampling; Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling techniques including
Gibbs samplers, Metropolis/Hastings and various improvements; Simulated annealing; Exact sampling techniques; Convergence analysis; Data
augmentation; Cluster sampling, such as Swendsen-Wang and SW-cuts; Hamiltonian and Langevin Monte Carlo; Equi-energy and multi-domain sampler;
and Techniques for mapping complex energy landscapes

The primary purpose of this course is to provide students with a common set of core knowledge about statistical computing computing for their
class work and research. The course will have an applied focus on tools. The course will involve the practical application of the ideas of
statistical computing and their implementation through statistical software, particularly R.

Prerequisites

-   Stat 202B: Matrix Algebra and Optimization.
-   People who didn’t take 202B before may still take this class as long as they have background on matrix algebra, probability theory, and programming skills. To do this attend the first classes and we can assess if this is advisable.
